More sla acs (#1898)
vegaprotocol/specs: protocol/0044-LIME-lp_mechanics.md

- `market.liquidity.earlyExitPenalty` (decimal ≥0), sets how much LP forfeits of their bond in case the market is below target stake and they wish to reduce their commitment. If set to `0` there is no penalty for early exit, if set to `1` their entire bond is forfeited if they exit their entire commitment, if set >1, their entire bond will be forfeited for exiting `1/earlyExitPenalty` of their commitment amount.
- `market.liquidity.probabilityOfTrading.tau.scaling` sets how the probability of trading is calculated from the risk model; this is used to [measure the relative competitiveness of LPs supplied volume](0042-LIQF-setting_fees_and_rewarding_lps.md).
- `market.liquidity.minimum.probabilityOfTrading.lpOrders` sets a lower bound on the result of the probability of trading calculation.
- `market.liquidity.feeCalculationTimeStep` (time period e.g. `1m`) controls how often the quality of liquidity supplied by the LPs is evaluated and fees arising from that period are earmarked for specific parties. Minimum valid value `0`. Maximum valid value `validators.epoch.length`.

### Market parameters

> All market parameters can be set / modified as part of [market proposal](0028-GOVE-governance.md) / market change proposal and the new value take effect at the first new epoch after enactment.

Reviewer: It's true for "all market parameters". Please list the ones you have in mind.

> - `market.liquidity.priceRange` (decimal) - this is a percentage price move (e.g. `0.05 = 5%`) from `mid_price` during continuous trading or indicative uncrossing price during auctions.

Reviewer: Why is this line being added? I though we already have:

```
- `market.liquidity.priceRange` (decimal) - this is a percentage price move (e.g. `0.05 = 5%`) from `mid_price` during continuous trading or indicative uncrossing price during auctions. This is set / can be modified as part of [market proposal](0028-GOVE-governance.md) / market change proposal.
```

- `validators.epoch.length` - LP rewards from liquidity fees are paid out once per epoch according to whether they met the "SLA" (implied by `market.liquidity.commitmentMinTimeFraction`) and their previous performance (for the last n epochs defined by `market.liquidity.performanceHysteresisEpochs`), see [epoch spec](./0050-EPOC-epochs.md).
- `market.liquidity.earlyExitPenalty` (decimal ≥0), sets how much LP forfeits of their bond in case the market is below target stake and they wish to reduce their commitment. If set to `0` there is no penalty for early exit, if set to `1` their entire bond is forfeited if they exit their entire commitment, if set >1, their entire bond will be forfeited for exiting `1/earlyExitPenalty` of their commitment amount.
- `market.liquidity.probabilityOfTrading.tau.scaling` sets how the probability of trading is calculated from the risk model; this is used to [measure the relative competitiveness of LPs supplied volume](0042-LIQF-setting_fees_and_rewarding_lps.md).
- `market.liquidity.minimum.probabilityOfTrading.lpOrders` sets a lower bound on the result of the probability of trading calculation.

### Market parameters

> All market parameters can be set / modified as part of [market proposal](0028-GOVE-governance.md) / market change proposal and the new value take effect at at the first new epoch after enactment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All market parameters can be set / modified as part of [market proposal](0028-GOVE-governance.md) / market change proposal and the new value take effect at the first new epoch after enactment.
```

- If `market.liquidity.stakeToCcyVolume` is set to `0.0`, there is [target stake](./0041-TSTK-target_stake.md) of `1000` and there are 3 LPs on the market with stake / fee bid submissions of `100, 0.01`, `1000, 0.02` and `200, 0.03` then the liquidity fee is `0.02`. (<a name="0044-LIME-012" href="#0044-LIME-012">0044-LIME-012</a>)

- If a liquidity provider has `fraction_of_time_on_book` >= `market.liquidity.commitmentMinTimeFraction`, no penalty will be taken from their bond account (<a name="0044-LIME-013" href="#0044-LIME-013">0044-LIME-013</a>)
- If a liquidity provider has `fraction_of_time_on_book` = `0.3`, `market.liquidity.commitmentMinTimeFraction = 0.6`, `market.liquidity.sla.nonPerformanceBondPenaltySlope = 0.7`, `market.liquidity.sla.nonPerformanceBondPenaltyMax = 0.6` at the end of an epoch then they will forfeit `35%` of their bond stake, which will be transferred into the market's insurance pool (<a name="0044-LIME-014" href="#0044-LIME-014">0044-LIME-014</a>)
and in the case of spot markets into the network treasury for the asset (<a name="0044-LIME-048" href="#0044-LIME-048">0044-LIME-048</a>)

> - If a liquidity provider has `fraction_of_time_on_book` = `0.3`, `market.liquidity.commitmentMinTimeFraction = 0.6`, `market.liquidity.sla.nonPerformanceBondPenaltySlope = 0.7`, `market.liquidity.sla.nonPerformanceBondPenaltyMax = 0.6`and the market parameter change `market.liquidity.commitmentMinTimeFraction = 0.3` is enacted during the epoch then at the end of the current epoch LP will have their bond slashed. If the LP has `fraction_of_time_on_book` = `0.3` at the end of the next epoch, they are meeting their commitment and will not forfeit any of their bond stake. (<a name="0044-LIME-069" href="#0044-LIME-069">0044-LIME-069</a>)

Reviewer: I am not sure this is correct, timing-wise. Don't the parameter changes already apply at the end of the current epoch?

Reviewer 3: new value takes effect at the first new epoch after enactment, so I think its correct

  - GRPC (<a name="0044-LIME-057" href="#0044-LIME-057">0044-LIME-057</a>)
  - GRAPHQL (<a name="0044-LIME-058" href="#0044-LIME-058">0044-LIME-058</a>)
  - REST (<a name="0044-LIME-059" href="#0044-LIME-059">0044-LIME-059</a>)

> - When a LP commits liquidity and places orders on market 1 and on market 2 the LP has no liquidity commitment when I request for all LP orders through `ListLiquidityProvisions` api for this party, then only LP orders for market 1 are returned.  (<a name="0044-LIME-068" href="#0044-LIME-068">0044-LIME-068</a>)

Author: ```suggestion
- When a LP commits liquidity on market 1 and on market 2 this LP has no liquidity commitment when I request for all LP provisions through `ListLiquidityProvisions` api for this party, then only LP provisions for market 1 is returned.  (<a name="0044-LIME-068" href="#0044-LIME-068">0044-LIME-068</a>)
```

  `LP2` will receive a full `100` stake back whilst `LP1` will receive a total of `85` back into their general account with `15` transferred into the market's insurance account  (<a name="0044-LIME-026" href="#0044-LIME-026">0044-LIME-026</a>)
- When LP is committed they are obliged to provide liquidity equal to their commitment size on both sides of the order book (<a name="0044-LIME-027" href="#0044-LIME-027">0044-LIME-027</a>)
- For a market that is in opening auction and LP has committed liquidity:

>   - LP can increase their commitment and it will take effect immediately (<a name="0044-LIME-050" href="#0044-LIME-050">0044-LIME-050</a>). For spot (<a name="0044-LIME-054" href="#0044-LIME-054">0044-LIME-054</a>)

Reviewer: This is inaccurate: when a LP increases commitment then
1. it takes effect immediately for the purposes of LP stake supplied to the market (in particular we can leave a liquidity auction under the right conditions).
1. in terms of liquidity they're expected to supply: this only takes effect from the start of the next epoch.

Author: updated AC and added one more AC for Liquidity Auction scenario

> - Consider a market in liquidity auction, when a LP increases their commitment it will take effect immediate for the purposes of LP stake supplied to the market. Where LP `supplied stake > target stake` the market will leave liquidity auction when the liquidity auction ends
>   - In terms of the liquidity they are expected to supply: this only takes effect from the start of the next epoch
>   (<a name="0044-LIME-102" href="#0044-LIME-102">0044-LIME-102</a>)

>   - LP can decrease their commitment and it will take effect immediately without incurring penalties (<a name="0044-LIME-051" href="#0044-LIME-051">0044-LIME-051</a>). For spot (<a name="0044-LIME-055" href="#0044-LIME-055">0044-LIME-055</a>)

Reviewer: This is wrong. 
1. During an opening auction the LP can decrease or cancel commitment and the effect is immediate. 
2. During continuous trading an LP can submit a transaction to decrease commitment but it will only happen at the end of current epoch.

Author: For point1 updated AC
For point2 added new ac 0044-LIME-101

> - During continuous trading an LP can submit a transaction to decrease commitment but it will only happen at the end of current epoch. (<a name="0044-LIME-101" href="#0044-LIME-101">0044-LIME-101</a>)

>   - Target stake is 0 so LP can cancel their commitment without incurring penalties (<a name="0044-LIME-053" href="#0044-LIME-053">0044-LIME-053</a>)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - If target stake is 0 then any LP can cancel their commitment without incurring penalties (<a name="0044-LIME-053" href="#0044-LIME-053">0044-LIME-053</a>)
```

  - when `market.liquidity.providers.fee.calculationTimeStep` is set to `0` any funds that are in `ACCOUNT_TYPE_FEES_LIQUIDITY` account will be distributed to `ACCOUNT_TYPE_LP_LIQUIDITY_FEES` on the next block (<a name="0044-LIME-061" href="#0044-LIME-061">0044-LIME-061</a>)
  - if `market.liquidity.providers.fee.calculationTimeStep` is set to `10s` and `validators.epoch.length` is set to `15s`, during the first `10` seconds of the current epoch parameter change `market.liquidity.providers.fee.calculationTimeStep = 3s` is enacted, at the end of the epoch any funds that are in `ACCOUNT_TYPE_FEES_LIQUIDITY` account will be distributed to `ACCOUNT_TYPE_LP_LIQUIDITY_FEES` on the next block. For the next epoch the distribution will take place at `3` second intervals (<a name="0044-LIME-062" href="#0044-LIME-062">0044-LIME-062</a>)
- For a market that is in continuous trading if a new LP has active buy and sell orders on the market then makes a liquidity commitment to that market, at the start of the next epoch the active orders will count towards the LPs liquidity commitment. (<a name="0044-LIME-090" href="#0044-LIME-090">0044-LIME-090</a>)

> - If an LP with a liquidity provision and active orders on a market cancel their provision only (orders remain active), after the cancellation penalty (if it applies at end of epoch) the end of next epoch lp will not accrue any rewards or incur penalty for trades on the market. (<a name="0044-LIME-097" href="#0044-LIME-097">0044-LIME-097</a>)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If an LP with a liquidity provision and active orders on a market cancels their liquidity provision (orders remain active), after the cancellation penalty (if it applies at end of epoch) at the end of the next epoch the LP will not accrue any rewards for trades on the market. (<a name="0044-LIME-097" href="#0044-LIME-097">0044-LIME-097</a>)
```

> - In a market where the market parameter is `market.liquidity.priceRange = 0.05 (5%)` and is engaged in continuous trading with a mid price set at 5, a new Liquidity Provider (LP) has infused liquidity by placing a buy order at a price of 4.75 and a sell order at a price of 5.25 (with sufficient volume). As the epoch progresses, if the market parameter is altered to `market.liquidity.priceRange = 0.01` (1%), then upon the culmination of the current epoch, the LP will still have fulfilled their committed notional volume, rendering them exempt from a bond penalty. (<a name="0044-LIME-091" href="#0044-LIME-091">0044-LIME-091</a>)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Consider a market where `market.liquidity.priceRange = 0.05 (5%)` and which is in continuous trading with a mid price of 5. There is an LP who's committed to provide liquidity. They place a buy order at a price of 4.75 and a sell order at a price of 5.25 (with sufficient volume). As the epoch progresses, if the market parameter is altered to `market.liquidity.priceRange = 0.01` (1%), then upon the culmination of the current epoch, the LP will still have fulfilled their committed notional volume, rendering them exempt from a bond penalty. (<a name="0044-LIME-091" href="#0044-LIME-091">0044-LIME-091</a>)
```

> - In a market, where the market parameter is `market.liquidity.priceRange = 0.05`, and it is engaged in continuous trading with a mid price set at 5, a new Liquidity Provider (LP) has injected liquidity by placing a buy order at a price of 4.74 and a sell order at a price of 5.25 (with sufficient volume). As the epoch unfolds, if the market parameter is modified to `market.liquidity.priceRange = 0.01` (1%), then at the conclusion of the ongoing epoch, the LP will not have met their committed notional volume, resulting in the imposition of a bond penalty. (<a name="0044-LIME-093" href="#0044-LIME-093">0044-LIME-093</a>)

Reviewer: Please modify this in line with the edits above, for clarity / consistency.

Author: done

> - Consider a market, where `market.liquidity.priceRange = 0.05`, and which is in continuous trading with a mid price set at 5. There is an LP who's committed to provide liquidity. They place a buy order at a price of 4.74 and a sell order at a price of 5.25 (with sufficient volume). As the epoch progresses, if the market parameter is altered to `market.liquidity.priceRange = 0.01` (1%), then upon the culmination of the ongoing epoch, the LP will not have met their committed notional volume, resulting in the imposition of a bond penalty. (<a name="0044-LIME-093" href="#0044-LIME-093">0044-LIME-093</a>)

  `LP2` will receive a full `100` stake back whilst `LP1` will receive a total of `85` back into their general account with `15` transferred into the market's insurance account  (<a name="0044-LIME-026" href="#0044-LIME-026">0044-LIME-026</a>)
- When LP is committed they are obliged to provide liquidity equal to their commitment size on both sides of the order book (<a name="0044-LIME-027" href="#0044-LIME-027">0044-LIME-027</a>)
- For a market that is in opening auction and LP has committed liquidity:

>   - LP can increase their commitment and it will take affect immediately (<a name="0044-LIME-050" href="#0044-LIME-050">0044-LIME-050</a>). For spot (<a name="0044-LIME-054" href="#0044-LIME-054">0044-LIME-054</a>)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - LP can increase their commitment and it will take effect immediately (<a name="0044-LIME-050" href="#0044-LIME-050">0044-LIME-050</a>). For spot (<a name="0044-LIME-054" href="#0044-LIME-054">0044-LIME-054</a>)
```

>   - LP can decrease their commitment and it will take affect immediately without incurring penalties (<a name="0044-LIME-051" href="#0044-LIME-051">0044-LIME-051</a>). For spot (<a name="0044-LIME-055" href="#0044-LIME-055">0044-LIME-055</a>)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - LP can decrease their commitment and it will take effect immediately without incurring penalties (<a name="0044-LIME-051" href="#0044-LIME-051">0044-LIME-051</a>). For spot (<a name="0044-LIME-055" href="#0044-LIME-055">0044-LIME-055</a>)
```

>   - LP can decrease their commitment and it will take affect immediately without incurring penalties (<a name="0044-LIME-051" href="#0044-LIME-051">0044-LIME-051</a>). For spot (<a name="0044-LIME-055" href="#0044-LIME-055">0044-LIME-055</a>)

Reviewer: I don't believe this is correct. First, don't decreases happen at the end of epoch? Second, whether they incur penalties or not depends on target stake. Please discuss this with @Jiajia-Cui if the mechanism isn't clear before updating the AC.

Reviewer 3: during opening auction, target stake is 0, so LP can decrease their commitment, and it will take effect immediately

- For a market that is in continuous trading if a new LP has active buy and sell orders on the market then makes a liquidity commitment to that market, at the start of the next epoch the active orders will count towards the LPs liquidity commitment. (<a name="0044-LIME-071" href="#0044-LIME-071">0044-LIME-071</a>)
- If an LP with a liquidity provision and active orders on a market cancel their provision only (orders remain active), after the cancellation penalty (if it applies at end of epoch) the end of next epoch lp will not accrue any rewards or incur penalty for trades on the market. (<a name="0044-LIME-081" href="#0044-LIME-081">0044-LIME-081</a>)

> - For a market with market parameter `market.liquidity.priceRange = 0.05` (5%), is in continuous trading with `mid price` set to `5`, a new LP has committed liquidity with buy order at price `4.74` and sell order at price `5.25`. During the epoch market parameter change `market.liquidity.priceRange = 0.1` (10%) is enacted then at the end of the current epoch the LP is meeting their committed volume of notional and a bond penalty will apply. (<a name="0044-LIME-072" href="#0044-LIME-072">0044-LIME-072</a>)

Reviewer: I don't believe this is correct. The bounds within which volume counts is [5 - 0.05 x 5, 5 + 0.05 x 5] = [4.75, 5.25]. So they're not meeting their commitment on the buy side of the book which means they're not meeting their commitment. For the current epoch they've not met commitment and bond will be slashed. Starting the next epoch, their volume counts towards the commitment. 

OR it may happen that the range parameter gets used as soon as it's enacted which means that for part of the epoch they weren't meeting commitment but for a part of the epoch they were... and then it depends on the SLA number and the ration of the times to know whether they get slashed - or not.

Reviewer 3: I made an update on the AC

> - For a market with parameter `market.liquidity.priceRange = 0.05` (5%), is in continuous trading with `mid price` set to `5`, a new LP has committed liquidity and orders at buy price `4.74` and sell price `5.25`. During the epoch market parameter change `market.liquidity.priceRange = 0.01` (1%) is enacted then at the end of the current epoch the LP is meeting their volume of notional and penalty will not apply. (<a name="0044-LIME-074" href="#0044-LIME-074">0044-LIME-074</a>)

Reviewer: This one, they're not meeting the commitment during the entire epoch, the param change can't help, they get slashed.

Reviewer: I've stopped reading the rest, please review the remaining in the light of the above comments.

Reviewer 3: I made an update on the Acs

  - LP can decrease their commitment and it will take affect immediately without incurring penalties (<a name="0044-LIME-051" href="#0044-LIME-051">0044-LIME-051</a>). For spot (<a name="0044-LIME-055" href="#0044-LIME-055">0044-LIME-055</a>)
  - LP can cancel their commitment without incurring penalties (<a name="0044-LIME-053" href="#0044-LIME-053">0044-LIME-053</a>)
- For a market that is in continuous trading and a single LP has committed liquidity:
  - The LP can cancel their commitment at any time (though this may involve incurring a penalty) (<a name="0044-LIME-060" href="#0044-LIME-060">0044-LIME-060</a>) for spot (<a name="0044-LIME-056" href="#0044-LIME-056">0044-LIME-056</a>)
- For a market that is in continuous trading and LP has committed liquidity
  - when `market.liquidity.providers.fee.calculationTimeStep` is set to `0` any funds that are in `ACCOUNT_TYPE_FEES_LIQUIDITY` account will be distributed to `ACCOUNT_TYPE_LP_LIQUIDITY_FEES` on the next block (<a name="0044-LIME-082" href="#0044-LIME-082">0044-LIME-082</a>)

>   - if `market.liquidity.providers.fee.calculationTimeStep` is set to `15s` and `validators.epoch.length` is set to `10s`, during the current epoch parameter change `market.liquidity.providers.fee.calculationTimeStep = 5s` is enacted, any funds that are in `ACCOUNT_TYPE_FEES_LIQUIDITY` account will be distributed to `ACCOUNT_TYPE_LP_LIQUIDITY_FEES` on the next block. For the next epoch the distribution will take place at `5` second (<a name="0044-LIME-061" href="#0044-LIME-061">0044-LIME-061</a>)

Reviewer: I don't think this is a valid combination.

Author: yes i agree. I've removed this ac

- If an LP with a liquidity provision and active orders on a market cancel their provision only (orders remain active), after the cancellation penalty (if it applies at end of epoch) the end of next epoch lp will not accrue any rewards or incur penalty for trades on the market. (<a name="0044-LIME-083" href="#0044-LIME-083">0044-LIME-083</a>)
- For a market with market parameter `market.liquidity.priceRange = 0.05` (5%), is in continuous trading with `mid price` set to `5` and a new LP has committed liquidity:
  - if during the epoch market parameter change `market.liquidity.priceRange = 0.1` (10%) is enacted and the LP has a buy order at price `4.74` and a sell order at price `5.25`, the LP is not meeting their committed volume of notional and a bond penalty will apply. The next epoch the parameter change takes effect, LP will meet their committed volume of notional and no bond penalty will apply. (<a name="0044-LIME-072" href="#0044-LIME-072">0044-LIME-072</a>)
  - if the LP has a buy order at price `4.75` and a sell order at price `5.26`, the LP is not meeting their committed volume of notional (<a name="0044-LIME-073" href="#0044-LIME-073">0044-LIME-073</a>)

>   - if during the epoch market parameter change `market.liquidity.priceRange = 0.01` (1%)  the LP has a buy order at price `4.75` and a sell order at price `5.25`, the LP is meeting their committed volume of notional and no bond penalty will apply. The next epoch the parameter change takes effect, LP will not meet their volume of notional and bond penalty will apply. (<a name="0044-LIME-074" href="#0044-LIME-074">0044-LIME-074</a>)

Reviewer: I can't parse this sentence.

Author: i've reworked the acs using the example in below comment

Reviewer 3: I made an update on the AC

> - For a market with market parameter `market.liquidity.priceRange = 0.5` (5%), is in monitoring auction with `last trade price` set to `5` and a new LP has committed liquidity:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- For a market with market parameter `market.liquidity.priceRange = 0.05` (5%), is in monitoring auction with `last trade price` set to `5` and a new LP has committed liquidity:
```

>   - if the `indicative uncrossing price` is set to `4`, the LP has a buy order at price `3.79` and a sell order at price `5.25`, the LP is not meeting their committed volume of notional (<a name="0044-LIME-075" href="#0044-LIME-075">0044-LIME-075</a>)

Reviewer: please make the ACs clear with what parameters apply, it's hard to scroll up to figure out what the range is. Also during auction we depend on last trade price as well as indicative uncrossing price.

Author: @davidsiska-vega does this read better?

`For a market with market parameter `market.liquidity.priceRange = 0.05` (5%), is in monitoring auction with `last trade price` set to `5`, `indicative uncrossing price` is set to `4` and the LP has committed liquidity and orders at buy price `3.79` and sell price `5.25`, at the end of the epoch the LP is not meeting their committed volume of notional because the buy price is less than `5%` of `1-0.05 x min(5, 4) = 3.80` (<a name="0044-LIME-075" href="#0044-LIME-075">0044-LIME-075</a>)`

Reviewer 3: I made an update on the AC

  - `market.liquidityV2.sla.nonPerformanceBondPenaltySlope` valid values: `>=0`, `<=1000` default value of `2`  (<a name="0044-LIME-040" href="#0044-LIME-040">0044-LIME-040</a>)
  - `market.liquidityV2.sla.nonPerformanceBondPenaltyMax` valid values: `>=0`, `<=1` default value of `0.5`  (<a name="0044-LIME-041" href="#0044-LIME-041">0044-LIME-041</a>)
  - `market.liquidityV2.stakeToCcyVolume` valid values: `>=0`, `<=100` default value of `1`   (<a name="0044-LIME-042" href="#0044-LIME-042">0044-LIME-042</a>)

#### Market parameters validation

- Boundary values are respected for the market parameters

>   - `market.liquidity.providers.fee.calculationTimeStep` valid values: `>=0`, `<= validators.epoch.length` (<a name="0044-LIME-063" href="#0044-LIME-063">0044-LIME-063</a>)

Author: 1. There is no upper boundary for this market parameter, should there be a sensible upper boundary value instead?

2. Its value is an `int64` that measures seconds as the interval, given that the value for epoch length has suffix e.g. `24h` would it make sense to have the same value format for this parameter?

cc @karlem @davidsiska-vega

Author: will be addressed by pr https://github.com/vegaprotocol/vega/issues/9063

Author: @davidsiska-vega @karlem 
what will be the default value for this new network parameter?

Reviewer: 1. with @karlem we agreed that this ought to be a network parameter and @karlem will provide the spec PR. 
2. the bounds are still `>=0` and `<=validators.epoch.length`. They need to be cross-validated against each other on change proposals. 
3. default value can be what `market.liquidity.providers.fee.distributionTimeStep` is set to now, which is `60m = 1h`.

Author: added default value to spec for this param
